Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to make several improvements to our user registration feature to begin,
let's set things up so that if a user has validation errors when they submit this form, let's just
redirect them back to the same home page and use flash messages to show the errors right here.
So let's jump into our text editor to get started.
And I want you to open up your user controller JS file, scroll down until you find your register function.
So that line will begin with exports dot register.
And remember, we have this if else area where if there are validation errors, then we are going to
send them here.
Otherwise we just send back.
Congrats.
So we are interested in this area if there are errors.
So let's get rid of this response.
Dot send user errors line and instead we want to use the flash package to add those same errors into
our session data.
Then once we've done that, we can just redirect back to the home page.
So on this line, let's begin working with our array of validation errors so user dot errors.
And we know that all arrays have access to a method named for each.
Within these parentheses.
We give it a function as a function, parentheses, curly brackets, and for each is going to call this
function once for each item in this array.
So within these parentheses, for our function, let's include a parameter.
You could call this anything.
You could call it X or item or message or error.
I'll go with the aptly named error, OK.
And then within the body of this function, let's just say request dot flash and let's create a new
collection or array of messages within our flash session data.
Let's call it reg errors short for registration errors.
And then for the second argument, it's just the item that you would want to push onto this array.
So that would just be our parameter or the current item from our original array.
So error.
OK, now, after these new three lines of code, but still within the if block, let's add a new line.
And this is where we just want to redirect back to the home page.
You RL, however, because Flash is going to adjust our session data, that's going to require a trip
to the database.
So we don't actually want to redirect until that database action has completed.
So let's manually tell our session to save.
So request session, save.
Within these parentheses, we give it a function, function, parentheses, curly brackets, OK, and
now this function will not run until the session data in the database has actually had a chance to complete
and be updated.
So now this is where we can redirect, let's say response, dot redirect and the value of slash for
the home page.
OK, and now let's just go adjust our home function to use that session data.
Let me show you what I mean.
So if we scroll down in the same file, we should see an export home function.
All right.
We are interested in this else block.
Right.
That's going to render the guest template if the user has not successfully logged in.
This second argument here is the data that we are passing into that template.
So we've already given it one property named errors.
Let's just give it a second property named Reg Errors.
So right after the closing quote and parentheses for that flash package, but before the closing curly
bracket just out of comma, we want to add a new property, let's call it Reg Errors Colon and just
set that to pull in the flash data.
So request flash within the parentheses.
We're interested in the collection named Reg Errors.
OK, let's go ahead and save this.
And now let's jump in to the home dash.
Yes.
Template and leverage this data within your project's views folder.
Jump in to the file named home dash guest SJS and scroll down to line number 46 or at least to that
ballpark area.
And you should see an opening form tag with an action of register.
So that's the registration form right below this opening form tag line.
Let's add a new line and this is where we would want to show any potential registration errors.
And now in order to save a lot of typing, let's just copy and paste and recycle code from our previous
lesson.
What I mean by this is if we scroll back up a bit for me, it's around.
Line number thirty six, remember, we already wrote code that's going to loop through the errors array
and for each error it would show a div, this is the red rectangle div and then it's going to display
that individual message.
So this is already set up to loop through an array with potentially multiple errors or messages.
So let's just copy these three lines of code into our clipboard.
Go ahead and copy that and then scroll back down again.
We are looking for the opening form tag that's pointing towards the register right below that we can
just paste in our clipboard.
OK, and all we need to do is change this from instead of working with the errors array, we would want
to work with the Reg Errors Array, write the registration errors.
The only other change we need to make is let's get rid of this class of text center.
This is just a stylistic or visual change, but let's get rid of Tech Center and replace it with small.
OK, let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in the browser, if I leave all of these fields blank and try to submit, I should see three
error messages.
Awesome, you can see I'm redirected to the homepage and there are the three errors, you must provide
a username, you must provide a valid email, you must provide a password.
Let's test it out where we would only expect to see one error message.
So if I choose a username, choose a valid email, but maybe choose a password.
That's only two characters long if I try to submit.
Could we just see the one error message password must be at least 12 characters.
So at this point, flash messages for the registration form are working.
But before we move on, you might be thinking, hey, wouldn't it be better if we used browser side
JavaScript to enforce our rules for this form?
Right.
That way, we could enforce the rules before we actually let the visitors submit the data.
We could perform live on the fly validation after every keystroke, potentially, and we could easily
show the error messages directly on top of the related field for that message.
Well, if you're thinking that you are absolutely correct and we are indeed going to set that up, just
not right now, towards the end of this course, we are going to circle back to the registration form
and add that live on the fly validation.
We've already spent a good deal of time on user registration and user logging in and out.
So I don't want us to get bogged down even further with this feature right now.
Also, just know that it's good that we have this traditional server side validation set up anyways,
because you can never actually rely or trust browser side validation because an end user can disable
browser site JavaScript.
So that would disable any browser side checking or validation.
So the fact that we have server side validation set up is great.
We can rest assured that our rules are enforced server side no matter what.
And then later on in the course, we can circle back to this and add browser side validation just to
enhance the user experience.
Big picture.
You want validation on both sides, the server side for security reasons and the browser side for user
experience.
All right, let's change gears.
And for our next task in this lesson, let's add the validation rules that make sure that your username
and email have not already been taken.
Right.
We want to enforce that.
Your username and email are unique.
So to set that up, let's jump into our text editor and we need to open up our uppercase user JS model
file.
The model is where we want to enforce our rules.
Let's go ahead and scroll down until we find our validation function.
It's the line that begins with user prototype validate so within the body of this function, but below
all these existing rules or if statements, let's add a new line and let's write a comment to ourselves
so we stay organized and let's say only if username is valid, then check to see if it's already taken.
The idea here is there's no sense in wasting a trip to our database to see if the username exists already,
if it's not even a valid username.
Obviously, if it doesn't meet our validation checks, then it would have never ended up in the database
in the first place.
And any time we can save an unnecessary trip to the database is great for performance.
So right below this comment, let's first write an IF statement to see if the username is valid and
then within that if statement, we can check the database to see if that name exists or not.
So let's say if parentheses curly brackets for our if condition in these parentheses, let's say this
this data username length, let's say if it's greater than two characters, long meaning it's three
or greater and so double ampersand and this dot data username dot link is less than thirty one.
In other words, we're saying if it's between three and thirty characters long and then let's say and
or ampersand ampersand and it only contains alphanumeric characters so we can use our validator.
And remember it has a method named is alpha numeric and then we just pass it.
This data username.
Cool.
So only if all three of those checks evaluate to true then would we actually want to check the database
to see if the current username has been taken or not.
So within the if block, let's do this, let's create a variable and name it user name exists for now.
Let's not worry about setting this to equal anything.
We can circle back to that in just a minute.
But below this line, let's write another if statement and let's say if parentheses.
And this time the curly brackets can all stay on just one line like this.
Let's say if username exists, if this would evaluate true, then within the curly brackets, let's
just push an error onto our array of error.
Just like we did for all of our other validation rules, so if username exists within the brackets,
this dot errors dot push for the value.
We can just say that username is already taken.
OK, now we just need to circle back to this variable and give it a value that makes sense.
So when we say let username exists, let's add an equal sign and let's do this.
Let's begin with our Mongo DB users collection so users collection.
And then inside that, let's look for a method named find one.
So Dot find one for the argument within these parentheses, we give it an object as an argument.
And this is where we tell Mongo DB what we are trying to find.
We want to find the first document where the user name fields are property, colon matches, whatever
the user just tried to register with.
So this DOT data user name, the idea is that if Mongo DB does find a matching document, that's what
this promise is going to resolve to.
So username exists would equal an object that represents a document.
On the other hand, if Mongo does not find a matching document, this promise will resolve to null and
within the context of an if statement condition null will evaluate to false, whereas an object of any
sort will always evaluate to true.
So this would make perfect sense.
If username exists, throw this error.
Now here's where things get interesting.
We know that communicating with a database is an asynchronous action, meaning it's going to take some
time and it's going to run in the background and it's almost guaranteed that it's not going to complete
before JavaScript begins running this next operation.
And obviously this line of code depends on this line, right?
We need that variable to have its value.
So the question becomes, how can we coordinate the timing of these two operations?
Well, luckily for us, the Mongo DB node package is relatively modern.
And I know for a fact that this find one method returns a promise.
And remember, before a promise, we can just include the word awaked.
And now JavaScript will wait or freeze further operations until this promise actually resolves or rejects.
However, remember that the await feature is only available within an asynchronous function.
So the function that this code lives within can be found up here on the user's prototype that validate
line.
And right before the word function here, we just need to include the word async.
Cool with this in place, the await feature will work perfectly.
Now that we've set up our unique username check, lets just copy and paste these five lines of code
to do the same thing for the email address.
Right.
To check if the email is unique or already taken.
So I'm just going to select these five lines of code into my clipboard to save a bunch of typing, copy
it into my clipboard right below it, just paste.
Let's change the comment.
So only if email is valid, then check to see if it's already taken for the condition to see if the
email is valid.
We can get rid of these three checks from before.
So empty out those if parentheses and for an email address, all we need to do is leverage our validator
package and call its method that is named is email and then just pass it this DOT data email.
OK, let's change this variable name to email exists, OK?
And then within our users collection, let's find a document where let's change this from user name
to the email field and then change the matching value to this dot data dot email.
OK, and then on this line we can say if email exists, then push on an error message that says that
email is already being used.
Just a quick note that has nothing to do with programming and everything to do with the English language
in this comment.
There should be an apostrophe in the it's contraction.
OK, moving on.
Now that our validate function is asynchronous and is going to take a while to complete, we need to
take that into account when we actually call this function.
Let me show you what I mean within this same file.
Let's scroll down and find our register function.
This should be towards the bottom of the file.
And it's the area that begins with user dot prototype, dot register.
This is what our user controller is going to call.
So first we clean up the data and then we run our validation rules.
However, we just added asynchronous actions to this validate function.
So we need to be very careful to make sure that it actually completes before JavaScript would move on
to this action.
Right before we check to see if there are errors or not, we better first complete running all of our
validation checks, including those asynchronous calls to the database to check for the uniqueness of
username and email.
So to accomplish that, let's just go adjust our validate function to return a promise and then we can
await that promise down here in the register function.